"We thank Prof. Ricklefs and the two anonymous reviewers for their detailed comments that have enormously improved the clarity and quality of our manuscript. Below we detail our response to their input. 


Comments from handling editor, Prof. Robert Ricklefs 

Part of the problem is that many of the statistical techniques,  particularly with respect to network theory, are insufficiently  explained for most readers. The structure of the sampling regime is  not adequately described, and it would appear to be not strictly  comparable between the islands. 
    We have substantially re-written the methods and results sections to better detail statistical techniques and make more clear how focal sites were selected and plant-herbivore interaction data were compiled. 

A major problem from my perspective is that the "hypotheses"  refer to qualitative expectations of patterns and are not closely  linked to underlying mechanisms. Thus, the "tests" of these  hypotheses do not discriminate between well--stated alternative  mechanisms, but relate more to generalized expectations based  loosely on ecological and evolutionary theory.  
    We have re-framed the paper to focus first on  discovering new patterns in the context of the Hawaiian  chronosequence using ecological theory as a guide to identify  potentially interesting biological outliers. We then use these  patterns to generate new hypotheses about the feedback between  ecological and evolutionary mechanisms in community assembly 

Line 34 it is not clear that HI is beyond equilibrium dynamics;  perhaps the steady state is very low; if this has a different  meaning, then it should be made more explicit. 
    This has been changed to make no claim about  equilibrium 

Line 36 by ecological dynamics, do you mean long term  environmental change caused by post-eruption succession? This should  be explicit in the abstract. 
    We have made more clear that by "ecological  dynamics" we are referring to those mechanisms such as biotic  filtering and demography more often associated with ecological  time scales. 

Line 52 presumably you are referring to species within clades  of organisms at lower trophic levels; the trophic level itself  doesn't develop divergence. The same comment applies to the next  sentence. 
    Changed accordingly 

Lines 142-3 predictive power doesn't come from patterns 
    This phrasing has been removed 

Lines 169 ff. these predictions appear to be ad hoc, and not based on an underlying set of mechanisms. Why, for example, would primary succession necessarily override the consequences of non-random colonization from the mainland? What is it about the process of succession that might produce this effect, and how would one test for it in comparison with the outcome of alternatives? The basic problem is to use patterns to distinguish between underlying processes, which make unique predictions. Otherwise, this becomes an exercise in describing pattern rather than using pattern to distinguish between hypotheses (useful in its own right, of course). 
    Further analysis and more detailed data are certainly needed to use pattern to distinguish process. In recognition of that fact we have refocused our paper to present patterns and use preliminary analyses to generate more meaningful hypotheses that can be tested with data that are fast accumulating about the biota of volcanic archipelagos. 

Lines 213 ff. it might be good to state explicitly that you  are going to limit your comparisons to ohia forests at mid  elevation, if that is in fact how you are going to approach the  problem. 
    We have made this more explicit in the methods  section 

Lines 245 ff. at what level is genetic variation relevant to  the potential for divergence? Variation might be categorized within  a locality, within a volcano, and between volcanoes on the same  island; Fst values are mostly based on neutral variation, and  perhaps are not so relevant to differentiation by selection. How  will you use Fst values to estimate the potential for evolutionary  differentiation and perhaps species diversification within islands? 
    We have made more explicit that for evolution of novel  variants to arise gene flow must be reduced; $F_{ST$ captures the  spatial structure that comes from reduced gene flow. 

Lines 251 ff. it is not explicitly stated whether data exist  on the distribution of herbivores across plant species within each  site. How exactly were the bipartite networks constructed? 
    We have further clarified this in the methods  section, making clear that site-specific data do not exist for  plant host use so instead we make the reasonable assumption that  if a known host plant is present at a site it will eventually be  used and thus included in the network. 

Lines 269 ff. this description will be understood only by  individuals who work on network analysis. 
    We have further explained nestedness and modularity  in the methods section for non-specialist readers 

Line 290 ff. this hypothesis is more an assumption, in the  sense that it is not based on an underlying process regarding how  evolution should lead to specialization over time. The  specialist-generalist trade-off does not appear to evolve in a  single direction, and different levels of specialization might be  optimal depending on all sorts of considerations. Thus, "testing the  hypothesis" is really more like 'describing the pattern', since  theory concerning the specialization-generalization spectrum is not  taken up here. The same comment applies to the next paragraph, and  really concerns how we understand the word "hypothesis." 
    This hypothesis has been removed 

Line 308 it strikes me as odd that the variation among sites  within volcanoes is greater than the variation between volcanoes-or  am I interpreting these values incorrectly? It also seems from  Figure 1 that the distribution of sampling sites on the three  islands is quite different, which would seem to confound space and  age. 
    We agree that this result is unexpected. Rather than  the more typical isolation by distance scenario such a  partitioning of molecular variance could instead be consistent  with, for example, a process of repeated colonization events  between volcanoes leading to most molecular variance being  present on many volcanoes while little variance is explained by  unique variation between volcanoes. The primary difference in  sampling between Maui and Big Island is that genetic data are  only available from one volcano on Maui thus between volcano  comparisons are not possible.  

Line 324 some of the Hawaii species apparently have divergence  times older than the island, i.e., 1.15 Ma $>$ 0.5 Ma. How are we to  interpret genetic variation within the species that are older than  the island, as much of the genomic variation in the ancestral  population is carried by a small number of colonists; or are the  older age estimates the consequence of extinction or limiting  sampling? 
    Bias of some sort is aways possible, or an incorrect  calibration. It could also be that alleles that get to the big  island (even in one individual) are older than the big island  (hopping down island chain), and if those alleles get separated  in to different populations, and then diverge to species, the  genetic variation observed between groups could be older than  the habitat. 

Line 339 what exactly does the idea of maximum entropy  represent, and what is its status as a null model. Since this is an  important point, a little more explanation would be helpful to the  uninitiated reader. 
    We have greatly expanded the conceptual motivation  for maximum entropy, highlighting its interpretation in the  context of ecology and clarifying that it serves to provide a  yard stick against which to compare real assemblages. If those  assemblages fail to meet the predictions of maximum entropy then  there is evidence for the system to be out of statistical  equilibrium and thus warrant further exploration of the  mechanisms that could lead to that deviation. 

Lines 345 ff. this is beginning to sound a little ad hoc, in  terms of explanations for patterns. 
    We have provided more motivation for analyses in the methods section 

Line 368 can you make a concluding sentence that describes  these dynamics, or at least the change in patterns from youngest to  oldest? 
    This phrasing no longer exists in the new submission 

Lines 391 ff. this is an extremely interesting statement that  would benefit from additional explanation. 
    The statement of interest comes from the work of  Bennett & O'Grady (2013). We have made this source more clear  and contextualized it more within our own results. 

We have also attended to the following more minor corrections:     Lines 20-22 these superscript numbers do not appear in the author list.  Line 59 how about "Our analyses suggest"  Line 94 italicize Anolis  Line 415 "suggest"  Line 488 "assembly"  Line 542 "REFERENCES"   



Comments from Reviewer 1 

The genetic data and network analyses don't seem to hang  together to make a clear coherent story. Instead they seem merely  suggestive that older communities are structured by evolutionary  processes, and it is not always clear that other explanations for  the patterns observed can be ruled out. Overall, the paper has a  "preliminary" feel to it and I believe it would be much improved  if the intentions specified in the "Future research" section of  the paper were carried out. 
    Similarly to comments from Prof. Ricklefs, we have  addressed this by re-focusing the paper to more explicitly  address how the model system of Hawaiian arthropods can be used  to address eco-evolutionary questions. We then present our  analysis of mostly published data as a preliminary  proof-of-concept. 

There is quite a bit of literature around these days looking at  ecological vs. evolutionary processes as drivers of community  assembly. I suggest the authors look at the following to at least  provide some deeper background to their thinking about this  question. 
    We have now included a discussion of the literature  and how our study fits within the broader context. We have  incorporated as much of this new literature as possible, though  are constrained by citation limitations. 

Lines 169 and 178 More explanation is needed for the two  hypotheses. For hypothesis 1, why should early assembly appear  random? Are there other circumstances that would produce random  assembly? For hypothesis 2 more explanation is needed for why  evolutionary processes should result in higher levels of  specialization. I would think that this might depend upon the type  of selection regime. Can species sorting through time also result in  specialization? 
    These hypotheses no longer exist in the new  submission. 

I am not sufficiently knowledgeable to judge the molecular  techniques or divergence dating analysis. However I note that mtDNA  have been used in at least one case to look at divergence  times. Coyne has found that if closely related species hybridize,  then mtDNA cannot be used for this purpose because the mitochondria  of one species can be completely captured by the other, thus  obscuring divergence. The authors need to show that this is not a  problem for their analysis. 
    It is possible that these species are older than we  inferred from differences in their mtDNA (if similar DNA gets  into 2 species it takes longer for the species to show DNA  difference), but certainly the data show that some divergence  between species is of the time scale noted, that is, quite  recent. We now mention this issue (end of third paragraph of  Discussion). 

Generally, more explanation of network analysis and how it is  used and what can be inferred from it is needed. Ditto for  maximizing information entropy. The authors cite other papers that  use these methods, but these methods should be explained clearly in  the supplement to this paper so they can be easily evaluated. 
    We have expanded the methods and results section to  better explain the origin and meaning of the results. We have  also included content in the introduction to better motivate  conceptually the use of maximum entropy in our analysis. 

Line 213 I would use the term "replicate climatic and biotic  templates" rather than "replicate communities" here since the  communities you are studying have different assembly and  evolutionary histories. 
    This wording has been removed 

Line 228 and elsewhere. accession numbers not given 
    Accession numbers will be procured upon acceptance  for publication 

Line 278 What aggregate properties were maintained in the null  models and how might they affect you inferences. Some info is given  in the supplement but more detail is needed. 
    We have further clarified the null models in the  methods section 

Line 282 probabilistic and degree distribution models need more  explanation, again in the supplement. Degree has a jargony  character. It is used several places in the paper and it is not  always clear what it means. 
    We have further clarified the meaning of the degree  distribution, its derivation, use and interpretation, in the  introduction and methods section 

Line 322 I didn't see anywhere else in the paper a discussion of this phylogenetic data. Is it different from the genetic data? 
    We have clarified that these phylogenetic data are from relevant publications but not the genetic data we analyze. 

Lines 340-352 Patterns here are difficult to interpret (at  least for me) 
    We have added further discussion of the generalized  linear model results in the discussion section 


Comments from Reviewer 2 

I think the manuscript do a poor job in connecting the results  reported with the vast literature on how ecological and evolutionary  processes shape the geographical variation of species  interactions. For example, it is safe to argue that the current  theoretical framework to understand the evolutionary outcomes of  species interactions is the Theory of the Geographic Mosaic of  Coevolution introduced by John N. Thompson and developed by multiple  research groups across the world. Accordingly, observational work,  lab experiments and a variety of mathematical and computational  models have been used to explore the role of species interactions on  diversification. It is primal to a paper that aims to contribute to  the integration of metacommunity ecology and evolution to do not  ignore the current status of the literature and to actually show in  which ways the paper provides news insights and contribute to the  available theory (ies). 
    The Geographic Mosaic Theory constitutes an  evolutionary hypothesis of selection mosaics, coevolutionary hot  and cold spots, and trait remixing by dispersal; it aims to  explain how coevolution reshapes interactions across different  spatial and temporal scales, and analyzes the role of species  interactions on diversification. Exploring the geographic mosaic  of coevolution in the context of island chronologies would  indeed present extremely interesting opportunities to further  understand the micro-evolution of species  interactions. Geographic mosaic theory has been developed  largely in isolation from the network theoretic approach, a  point acknowledged by Thompson himself in collaboration with  Guimaraes and others (Guimaraes et al. 2006 Proc. R. Soc. B.)  and thus integrating the two is a worthy task, but beyond the  scope of our paper. Our approach is more in line with the  network theoretic work, focusing on how the structure of  interactions of a whole community changes over time and space,  rather than on diversification of traits. However, the  Geographic Mosaic theory, and in particular the role of trait  remixing and selection mosaics, will be one of the key areas we  will explore as we accumulate population genetic data across the  chronosequence. We have included this point in the Future  Research. 

Some of the key predictions tested in this manuscript are  related on how evolutionary processes should shape network  structure. Unfortunately, these predictions are based on assumptions  that do not hold. For example, we have now multiple theoretical  evidence suggesting nestedness would be favored by natural selection  (the work by Suweiss), differential extinction of species (the work  by Fontaine and Thebault) and processes minimizing competition (the  work by Bastolla). Therefore, to assume non-evolutionary processes  would generate nestedness is not supported for our current  theory. Moreover, to assume that evolution would necessarily favor  specialization, and consequently, modularity is not supported by the  evidence provided by both empirical and theoretical work on the  evolution of species interactions in which a consumer can attack  multiple prey species. Thus, the authors need to revisit carefully  their assumptions and hypotheses to see if their results can still  be presented as evidence of increased role of evolutionary processes  in older islands or if alternative explanations are more likely to  explain the observed pattern. In my opinion, and ignoring my  concerns related to the data used (see below), I think that the  results may provide evidence for particular outcomes of the  evolutionary process in interactions among plants and herbivores. 
    In line with further comments from Reviewer 2 and  from Prof. Ricklefs, we do not yet have sufficient data to use  pattern to distinguish between multiple competing hypotheses  about process. Thus instead of setting out to test hypotheses we  use existing data and a combination of analytical techniques to  generate a set of more meaningful hypotheses that will soon be  testable with mounting ecological and evolutionary data from  island systems. However, we have to disagree that theory  strictly supports a deep time evolutionary cause of  nestedness. Indeed the work of Suweis, claiming an abundance  optimization criterion, is in conflict with the stability  optimization arguments of Bastolla, Fontaine and Thebault. The  work of Suweis is also consistent with previous work, which we  cite, that nestedness is a likely outcome of random assembly as  the crux of Suweis’s argument is that increased abundance,  regardless of origin, increases nestedness. A primary goal of  our paper is to provide a framework for explicit tests of these  such ideas. 

The use of maximum entropy theory in the manuscript is  hermetic. The authors mention in multiple parts of the text the  notion of the statistical steady state of ecological systems and how  this steady state provides a theoretical benchmark. Nevertheless,  there is no mention on how these expected distributions look  like. For example, what is the degree distribution predicted by the  maximum entropy theory? Even if Harte (2011) provides the expected  distributions this missing information does not allow a reader not  deeply familiarized maximum entropy theory to understand the results  reports and the usefulness of maximum entropy theory for this work. 
    This is a very valid point, and one we hope has now  been addressed: in the introduction and methods sections we have  greatly expanded our description and conceptual motivation for  using maximum entropy. 

Because most of the available evidence for macroecological  studies is correlative, it is usual to control for multiple  confounding variables that may affect the reported patterns, leading  to spurious correlations. Indeed, this careful exploration sets a  control for inference on spatial and temporal trends in large-scale  studies in ecology. I missed this kind controlled analysis in the  current manuscript and without any kind of sensitivity analysis  there is no enough evidence to support - in my opinion - the view  that age is the best explanation for the observed patterns. I would  like to know how the observed patterns are affect by island size or  climate and habitat heterogeneity. To assume the islands are  climatic similar may not be enough and there are ways of performing  more rigorous analysis. 
    We agree that such statistical control is the core  analytical strength of macroecology. Data do not currently exist  to make such detailed analysis possible. Here again we have  re-cast our paper, acknowledging this data limitation, to focus  on using existing data to generate a richer set of hypotheses to  be tested on similarly richer data. 

I have two major concerns with the network analysis performed by  the authors. First, I am afraid that the trends described are much  less evident than stated by the authors. There is no linear or  monotonic change in nestedness and modularity with island  age. Indeed, there are three islands showing higher nestedness and  the old one showing lower nestedness. Accordingly, there are two  islands showing more modular networks and two areas showing less  modular networks. Therefore, there is no strong evidence supporting  the predictions that island age would favor modular and less nested  networks. The authors need to review their interpretation of the  results to avoid overemphasize the mentioned trends and, actually,  to double-check if there is any trend. Second, it is impossible to  verify in the current draft the quality of the data used to build up  the ecological networks. The only information available is: "We  compiled plant-herbivore networks from published sources as  described in the main text. Table 1 lists publications used in  compiling these networks" (Supplement). Nevertheless the Table 1 of  the Supplement is not available for reviewing ("As part of the final  submission we will make available our compiled list of Hemiptera (a  typo here) and their plant hosts from published sources"). As a  consequence, it is impossible to me, as a reviewer, to make any  evaluation on how adequate is the dataset used to build up the  networks and how comparable the networks are. Thus, the central  information for this manuscript is missing and I am afraid I cannot  just believe that the data are adequate for the analysis  performed. Along the same lines, it is not clear to me if the  interactions were actually observed in each island or just assumed  because there is information in the literature that a given insect  feeds on a given co-occurring plant elsewhere. If the latter case is  true, all the analysis is invalidated as a test of local,  evolutionary assembly of ecological networks since it will be based  on the assumption that there is no local specialization. 
    In line with similar concerns from Prof. Ricklefs we  have re-cast the manuscript as presenting a framework for  integrating ecological and evolutionary perspectives on  biodiversity using island chronosequecnes and ecological theory  to do so. We have also made network construction and analysis  more transparent in the methods. From this it should be clear  that indeed interactions are derived from the spatial  coincidence of herbivores and their potential host plants. This  undeniably ignores the possibility of local specialization;  however, local specialization is unlikely due to the already  restricted (i.e. localized) ranges from which species  descriptions are based and because the taxonomic level of  specialization is typically that of genera. 

Abstract the way network analysis is mentioned in the methods  do not make clear why the authors performed this set of analysis. 
    We now make clear that these metrics summarize  network structure. 

Line 70 To state that "genomic and computational techniques  have re-opened scientists' eyes to the rich and dynamic interplay  between these processes" (ecology and evolution) is unfair with the  work of multiple research groups that have been using multiple  approaches, from naturalistic observations to detailed lab  experiments, to explore the interplay of ecology and evolution. 
    We have removed this language 

Line 84 I missed some discussion on the limitations of using  islands as study case. 
    We have generally clarified our discussion of  oceanic archipelagos as model systems. While the advantages of  island systems are largely universal (e.g. their biotic  simplification, discretization in space and time) their  limitations are system specific and not unlike limitations  possibly encountered in any mainland systems (habitat  degradation, invasive species, etc.). Thus we do not address  these simultaneously case-specific and yet non-unique  limitations. 

Line 106 This is a quite limited definition of ecology and I  would doubt that ecologists that are not community ecologists would  agree. 
    We have removed reference to "ecology" and instead  refer to "ecological mechanisms" such competition and neutral  drift. 

Line 116 The use of network theory is much older than suggested  in this sentence. See the work by Cohen, Margalef, Odum, Paine, May,  and Pimm and the vast literature on food webs on the 70s and 80s. 
    While we acknowledge this earlier work, the more  relevant application of network theory in ecology to our work  comes more recently as indicated by our citations.  

Line 133 This paragraph would be benefited for a synthesis of  what we know about the integration of the mentioned processes. 
    We have substantially re-worked the introduction to  now include more context. 

Line 282 Please provide the actual equations describing the  probability of two species interact in each null model. This  information should be available at least in the supplement. 
    We have provided a more detailed verbal description  of these null models and full detailes are available in the  works cited. 

Line 283 It is odd to call a species an "island  cosmopolitan." 
    We retain this term as "cosmopolitan" refers to  widely distributed species and here we wish to specifically  refer to those species widely distributed across the islands,  but not globally. 

Line 458 Specialization is not evidence for  coevolution. Coevolution can favor generalization and specialization  can emergence in the absence of coevolution. 
    Language conflating specialization and coevolution  has been removed 

Lines 487 to 491 This part is speculative and based in a  non-published paper that is not available to the audience yet. I  suggest removing it. 
    The section has been removed. 

Line 488 A typo: assembly.  
    Corrected
